Holistic Ministry Practicum
Spring 2026 Syllabus
3 credit hours
Tim Trezise, MS
Cell: (518) 944-6746
I. Course Description
This course focuses on the transformational power of the Holy Spirit working through the gospel proclaimed
holistically in word and deed within one’s culture and across cultures.
II. Course Objectives
The student will:
A. understand his/her role and the church’s role within the Kingdom of God.
B. apply the truth of the Bible to whatever culture they are a part of, learning to do so with sensitivity,
respect, kindness, and love.
C. know how to interact with different cultures in a way that anticipates God’s redemptive work.
D. apply and demonstrate effective community development principles in the missional experience.
E. learn some of the history and status of missional work in Latin America.
F. develop a greater understanding of the variety of ministries and missional work by learning about
missionaries around the world and interacting with missionaries in Guatemala.
G. value cross-cultural ministry through the missional experience in Guatemala.
III. Reading
A. Required
Stearns, Richard. The Hole in Our Gospel, Nashville, TN: World Vision, Inc.2010.
Elmer, Duane. Cross Cultural Servanthood. Madison, WI: Intervarsity Press, 2006.
Read for optional extra credit:
Corbett, Steve & Fikkert, Brian. When Helping Hurts. Chicago, IL: Moody Press, 2012.
B. Recommended & Referenced Resources
Allen, Scott. Truth and Community Transformation: Foundational Principles for Distinctively Biblical
Community Development. Phoenix, AZ: Food For the Hungry International, 2003.
Baker, Heidi. Compelled by Love. How to Change the World through the Simple Power of Love in Action.
Lake Mary, Florida: Charisma House, 2008.
Baker, Heidi & Rolland. Expecting Miracles. Grand Rapids, MI: Chosen Books, 2007.
Bunch, Roland. Two Ears of Corn. Oklahoma City, OK: World Neighbors, 1982.
Chambers, Robert. Rural Development: Putting the Last First. Harlow, England: Pearson Education
Limited, 1983
Chevreau, Guy. Turnings: The Kingdom of God and the Western World. England: Sovereign World, 2004.
Elmer, Duane. Cross Cultural Conflict. Downer’s Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press, 2006.
Goff, Bob. Love Does. Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, Inc. 2012.
Grigg, Viv. Companion to the Poor. Monrovia, CA: MARC Publications, 1990.
Hope, Anne & Timmel, Sally. Training for Transformation: A Handbook for Community Workers (Books 1-
4). London, England: ITDG Publishing, 2003
Keller, Timothy. Generous Justice. New York, New York, The Penguin Group, 2010
J. Mack & Leeann Stiles. Guide to Short-Term Missions. Intervarsity Press. Downers Grove, Il. 2000
Lane, Patty. A Beginner’s Guide to Crossing Cultures. Downer’s Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press, 2002.
1
Lingenfelter, Sherwood. Ministering Cross-Culturally. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2003.
Linthicum, Robert. Transforming Power. Downer’s Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press, 2003.
Lupton, Robert D. Toxic Charity. How Churches and Charities Hurt Those They Help. New York, NY:
HarperCollins Publishers, 2011.
Mandryk, Jason. Operation World: The Definitive Prayer Guide to Every Nation. 7th Edition. Colorado
Springs, CO: Biblica Publishing, 2010.
Myers, Bryant. Walking With the Poor. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2002.
Myers, Bryant. Working With the Poor. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1999.
Perkins, John. With Justice For All. Ventura, CA: Regal Books, 1982.
Peterson, Roger. Maximum Impact Short-Term Mission. Minneapolis, MN: STEM Press, 2003.
Platt, David. Follow Me. Carol Stream, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers, 2013.
Platt, David. Radical. Colorado Spring, CO: Multnomah Books, 2010.
Saint, Steve. The Great Omission: Fulfilling Christ’s Commission Completely. New York: YWAM
Publishers, 2001.
Sider, Ron. Rich Christians in an Age of Hunger. Nashville, TN: World Publishing, 1997.
Yohannan, K. P. Revolution in World Missions. Carrollton, TX: Gospel For Asia, 2003.
Supplemental reading from the texts listed above and a large variety of missionary biographies are available in the
LIFT library in Delaware or the Tim’s office library.
IV. Media used in this course:
Helping without Hurting Video Series Mission: God at Work, Faith in Action
The Joshua Project (Power Points & Videos) Mully
Living on a Dollar a Day - documentary The Mission: Robert DeNiro, Liam Neeson
Mama Heidi
V. Course Requirements & Grading
Total course points for not receiving college credit = 60
Total course points for college credit = 70 (red font is for college credit or extra credit)
1. Holistic Ministry Practicum Notebook & Reading Journal: (20 points - this is 33% or 29% of your overall
grade)
Use the 3-ring binder notebook for Missions Practicum (Fall Semester) and Holistic Ministry Practicum (Spring
Semester). Subdivide the HMP section into 3 sections (for class notes and the reading journal) separated with tab
dividers, with each labeled clearly.
A: Class notes – clearly label at the top of each class the date and number of the class (Example: HMP Class #1,
Dec 29 or if there are no hand-written notes then write on the handouts you receive for that class. The
notebook section will be graded for neatness, organization and completeness for concepts covered in classes.
Include any handouts and worksheets given in class with the notes for that class day. Notes for all classes
must be included even if you missed a class due to illness – in which case, you will be responsible for getting
the notes from another student who takes quality notes and asking them to get all handouts for you.
B: Spanish notes – clearly label at the top of each class the date and number of the class (Example: Spanish Class
#1, Dec 30 or if there are no hand-written notes for the Spanish class then write on the Spanish handouts or
worksheets you receive for that class: The notebook section will be graded for neatness, organization and
completeness for concepts covered in classes. Notes for all classes must be included even if you missed a
class due to illness – in which case, you will be responsible for getting the notes from another student who
takes quality notes and asking them to get all handouts for you.
C: Reading Journal - plan ahead to make time to read before the assignment is due –see reading due
dates in the class schedule in section VII of the syllabus. It is expected that you will complete all of
the reading assignments by the due date so you will be prepared to share and contribute in class
from what you learned in the reading. For best learning and application of the content, do a little bit
of reading & journal entries frequently instead of all the night before it is due.
When reading each assignment from The Hole in Our Gospel (THIOG), Cross Cultural Servanthood
(CCS) or Radical, fill a page in your Reading Journal with writing key points, concepts and quotes from each
chapter you learned or found interesting. Each entry is to be labeled and dated at the top of a new page by writing
the reading assignment in the same format as from the list of reading assignments in section VII. (Example:
THIOG: Intro & Chp 1).
Your journal entries and answers will be available for future reference and to share in class discussions.
2
All the reading journal entries are to be kept in section C of the HMP notebook, separate from the notes &
handouts from classes.
The HMP Notebook & Reading Journal is due after HMP classes on February 9th and March 25th, each is
worth 10 points.
Name:
Holistic Ministry Practicum Notebook & Reading Journal Grading Rubric
NOTEBOOK SECTION
___/ 1 Organized, neat and in chronological order = YES or NO = disorganized, mixed with other classes
___/ 3 Notes are thorough and detailed = YES or NO = sparse and lacking information
___/ 1 Complete = YES or NO = missing class notes
READING JOURNAL
___/ 1 Organized, neat and in order = YES or NO = disorganized, mixed with other classes
___/ 3 Notes are thorough and detailed = YES or NO = sparse and lacking information
___/ 1 Complete = YES or NO = missing chapter notes
____/ 10 Total
2. Missions Experience Journal: (10 points - this is 17% or 14% of your overall grade)
This can be done in a fourth section of the HMP notebook or in your own journal. You will have the opportunity to
have a large amount of time (estimated over 45 hours) experiencing and learning about missions first-hand when on the
mission trip. While in Guatemala, you will be required to write a minimum of five 2-page entries (labeled in the 4th
section of the HMP notebook as “Missions Journal Entry #1 through #5”). Include insights gained from discussions
with the missionaries in addition to questions, insights, thoughts, and reflections from classes or readings that further
develop while on the mission trip into your journaling. The last two entries must include thoughts from chapters 9, 10
& 11 of WHH and pages 247-249. Due by midnight on April 26th.
Name:
Missions Experience Journal Grading Rubric
___/ 2 Organized, neat and in order = YES or NO = disorganized, mixed with other classes
___/ 3 Five full 2-page entries = YES or NO
___/ 5 Entries are thorough and detailed, integrating your missions experience with insights gained from
discussions with the missionaries in addition to reflections, insights, and thoughts from classes
and/or readings (last 2 entries must reflect on information from chapters 9-11 & pages 247-249 in
WHH) = YES or NO = sparse and lacking thoughtful reflection & insights
____/ 10 Total
3. Guatemala preparation, planning and participation (30 points total)
A. Learning Spanish is important preparation for your time in Guatemala. Completion of DUOLINGO
assignments for each class will also be part of this grade. (15 points - this is 25% or 21% of your overall
grade)
B. Evangelistic Testimony (5 points - this is 8% or 7% of your overall grade) - In preparation for your time
serving and ministering in Guatemala with SI missionaries you will write an outline for sharing your
testimony, including the gospel message (5-6 minutes - without Spanish translation = about 1,000 words, 3-4
pages typed, double-spaced 12 font).
Before writing this, review your notes from the fall MP class about the gospel and the excellent
website to review, https://twowaystolive.com/. Remember, one of the most powerful ways to share
the gospel message is through how Christ has worked in your life – tell your story with key gospel
truths highlighted. Sharing how God has shown his grace and love in your life is how your story
can powerfully bring glory to His name. After all it is not truly your story, but his story manifested
through you. You will likely have an opportunity to share this with someone who can translate it in
Spanish when in the DR. You will need to print out the final version of this after corrections or
comments from the instructor. Due March 20th at the beginning of class.
C. After being in Guatemala, you will grade yourself and be graded by the instructor on overall effort, attitude &
initiative in interacting with the people, assisting in vocational ministry, and engaging in the culture. (10
3
points - this is 17% or 14% of your overall grade). Due at mission trip debriefing HMP class –
probably April 20th or 21st.
4. For those either receiving college credit (10 points - 17% of your overall grade) or anyone (not getting college
credit) wanting extra credit (7 points).
Choose option A, B or C.
A. Holistic Ministry Case Studies - (two video case studies for college credit or only one video for extra
credit) Discussion question answers - at the beginning of class on March 6th.
Watch one of the films and answer the discussion questions. Prior to viewing the video you should read the
questions provided by the instructor to better analyze the story, then answer the discussion questions
individually after discussing them in a student-led group. Answers should be 2-3 pages (typed, double-
spaced, 12 font) to all be turned in on the due date listed above. Decide which students are going to do this
assignment together then sign out the DVD (on the clipboard in Tim’s office).
• Mama Heidi - an American woman, Heidi Baker, leaves the American dream to minister to street
children and orphans in Africa
• "The Mission" - the historic story of Jesuit Priests bringing the love of Christ and community and
cultural development to an indigenous people of South America, standing against the evils of slave trade
B. Book Summary of a Missionary or a Missions Ministry
Sign out a book (from Tim’s library or other resources – to be approved by Tim) about missions, a
missionary, or ministry and write a 3-4 page report of what you learned of the life of the missionary as to how
it relates to missions & ministry principles discussed in class or read in your texts. Your essay should include
a brief biography/story of the person/ministry or an overview of the book, key points or philosophies, great
quotes, etc. Refer to the LIFT writing format in section VI: D (see below). Indicate what % of the book you
read. Due by midnight, March 26th.
C. Read “When Helping Hurts” by Corbett and Fikkert
Read all of WHH & simply choose 2 of the questions at the end of each chapter to answer. Turn in your
answers for all the chapters by midnight, March 26th.
(For those getting College Credit: 4 points of extra credit may be awarded for completing one video from A and
completing B or C - due on dates stated above)
VI. Course Policies
Letter/Numerical Grade Scale
A 95-100 B+ 89-91 C+ 79-81 D+ 69-71 F 0-61
A- 92-94 B 85-88 C 75-78 D 65-68
B- 82-84 C- 72-74 D- 62-64
A. Academic Policy:
o Academic Reviews: Each student’s academic performance will be reviewed by LIFT staff
twice during each semester. If he/she is failing any class (61% or below) he/she will be
dismissed from the program.
▪ Students must have at least a D- in all four classes to graduate from or complete
either semester and to qualify to stay in the program (to attend the second semester
and/or participate in the summer practicum).
o Academic Probation: LIFT teaching staff will review the academic status of each student at
least twice per semester (indicated on the semester schedule) and may also regularly check at
the beginning of each week. If you have less than C- (71% or below) in any class you will be
required to:
1) attend the weekly Study Team sessions for the duration of academic probation
2) not participate in that weekly excursion (or the next excursion if there is not one for the
week on probation) in order to have additional time to complete academic work.
3) Serve for a half day of housekeeping or on grounds on the day of the excursion, either for
academic or physical reasons.
4) Do fitness training on the day when not participating in an excursion. It must be either 2
laps up Oak Mountain or the Elm Lake Road or Melody Lodge route. If injured, discuss
with Tim alternative training to be done.
o To be eligible to attend the LIFT celebration dinner at the end of the fall semester or the LIFT
banquet at the end of the spring semester, students must achieve a minimum of a C- in all
classes in the respective semester.
4
o Academic Honors will be awarded each semester to any student who achieves an A- or an A
in all classes.
B. Group Work and Individual Work - When asked to do an assignment in a group for the benefits and
learning through discussion, your written response needs to be your own work, formulated in your own words
– not duplicated from someone else or you will void the points for that assignment.
C. Plagiarism
A student who confesses to dishonesty in a course already completed will be given a semester grade of
no higher than a “C” in the course in which it took place. If it happens in a course still in progress he/she
must make up, within two weeks of the date of the confession, the particular academic work in question and
will receive a grade not higher than “D” for the made-up requirements. The alternative is to receive a grade of
“F” (numerical grade of 0).
A student detected in committing academic dishonesty will receive a grade of “F” (numerical grade of 0)
for the part of the course (academic work) in question and a grade not higher than “D” for the course. A
student who has unintentionally misused sources (determined through consultation with faculty) will be
permitted to resubmit the work with a reduction of one full letter grade for the assignment. A report will be
filed and subsequent misuse of sources will be classified as plagiarism and subject to the consequences
articulated above.
Policy on appropriate and inappropriate use of AI for assistance with writing papers? (on all LIFT syllabi)
D. Late Assignments - Get your work in on time! Assignments done late are still encouraged to complete the
valuable work and learn from the assignment, however, anything late within the first three days of when it
was due will be deducted 10% of its value. No late assignments will be graded after three days of when it
was due. LATE WORK GREATLY REDUCES YOUR GRADE – JUST DO IT – ON TIME. You are
responsible for getting your work to the instructor. The instructor will not seek you out for your assigned
work. If you have difficult circumstances preventing you from turning the work in on time contact the
instructor prior to when it is due. All assignments are to be printed and turned in or emailed before class to
timt@cotw.org. The time that you email them in is the time of submission for the calculation of late work.
E. Writing Format
Assignments are to be typed, double-spaced, 12 font with correct spelling and grammar (use spell check and
grammar check to avoid points taken off). Email the document as a Word attachment to timt@cotw.org. If
using GoogleDocs instead of Word, send it timt@cotw.org and be sure permission for access is granted or
you will be deducted points if I need to contact you for permission for access, then send me an email to
timt@cotw.org to alert me to check for your assignment on my gmail account. Alert Tim that it is on
GoogleDocs so that I will go to my Gmail account to open it.
5
VII. Schedule for Class Topics and Assignments
DATE LESSON Lesson or Session Topic & Media Presentation & Assignments Due READING DUE
(THIOG & CSS)
Jan 5 HMP 1 Syllabus, course overview; love my neighbor, Power Point: Love my Neighbor, Entire Syllabus
the sheep & the goats Guat Prep 2, ministry support & team-building, process of writing & THIOG: Intro (5 pgs)
support letters & thank-you cards & letters
Jan 6 Spanish 1 & Write support letters & email to Caleb by 1/8 – Mailing on 1/13
HMP 2
Jan 7 HMP 3 Power Point: Biblically Holistic Ministry Biblical holistic ministry; Colossians 3: 12-17 THIOG: Chps 1 &
4 (21 pgs)
Jan 13 Spanish 2 & Balanced church ministry status of the church; Power Point on the Church; The state of THIOG: Chps 5 - 8
HMP 4 the global church; What is poverty? Power Point on Poverty; Mail Support Letters. (36 pgs)
Spanish Dictionary: 1 Lesson
Jan 16 HMP 5 UPGs, 10/40 window, Status of Global Missions Power Point & Handouts THIOG: Chps 9 & 10
(19 pgs)
CCS: Chp 1 & 2 (16 pgs)
Feb 3 HMP 6 Who and where are the poor and the rich? Global Rich List; Helping w/out Hurting: THIOG: Chps 11 & 12
Part 1- Reconsidering the meaning of poverty; Causes of poverty and intervention; (25 pgs)
CCS: Chp 3 (8 pgs)
Feb 9 HMP 7 Helping w/out Hurting: Part 2 – Seeing God at Work; ministering to the poverty of THIOG: Chps 13 & 14
people’s lives, Guat Prep 3 (17 pgs)
CCS: Chp 4 (20 pgs)
Feb 10 Spanish 3 Spanish Dictionary: 1 Lesson
Feb 10 HMP 8 Ministry in Culture, Levels of Culture, Avoiding blindness, biases, prejudices, THIOG: Chps 15, 16,
& paternalism, Barriers to Ministry, Review “What is the Gospel?”, sharing your story, (19 pgs)
Helping w/out Hurting: Part 3 Why good intentionsare not enough 1st HMP
Notebook/Reading Journal assessment due after class
Feb 16 HMP 9 Charles Zimmerman: Culturally relevant ministry across generations & cultures, building THIOG: Chps 17
bridges for making disciples; importance of understanding cultural core values and & 22 (23 pgs)
worldviews with ministry; Other guest speaker?
March 3 HMP 10 Sharing Your Faith (Tools and Training)
Spanish 4 Spanish Dictionary: 2 Lessons
March 4 HMP 11 Bridge builders to ministry, biases, paternalism, syncretism, materialism, Zion & Babylon,
strategic missional planning, contextualization, change agents,the written and oral word
March 6 HMP 12 Discuss evangelistic testimony assignment. Community transformation principles; Helping THIOG: Chps 18 - 20
w/out Hurting: Part 4- Joining God’s Work, Summarize and discuss concepts from (20 pgs.)
Elmer, principles of effective cross-cultural ministry.Community Development Case CCS: Chp 5 (19 pgs)
Studies: The Good, the Bad & the Ugly; Community Development: Appropriate
Technology; For College Credit or Extra Credit: A. Holistic Ministry Case Studies
due at the beginning of class
March 10 Spanish 5 CCS: Chps 6&7 (30 pgs)
Spanish Dictionary: 1 Lesson
March 17 Capital City Serve a day and a half & Debrief the experience
Rescue Mission
March 18 HMP 13 Watch documentary: “Mully”
March 20 HMP 14 & Evangelistic Testimony due at the beginning of class THIOG: Chps 23 - 26
Guatemala Helping w/out Hurting: Part 5 – Fostering Change Short Term Missions & (34 pgs.)
Briefing Standards of Excellence; Students International model for missions; Guat Prep 4 & Guat CCS: Chp 8 (18 pgs)
Prep 5 (part)
March 24 HMP 15 The Kingdom Community & Lifestyle; A Generous Lifestyle: How to give well
Helping w/out Hurting: Part 6- Moving Forward
March 25 HMP 16 & Guatemala Prep Session #5, Mission Trip Briefing, realistic expectations, travel THIOG: 287-299 &
HMP 17 Plans and logistics 2nd HMP Notebook/ Journal due after class. 305 (13 pgs)
HMP 16: Living on a Dollar a Day documentary CCS: Chps 9&10 (28 pgs)
March 26 For College Credit / Extra Credit: B. Complete a book review about a
missionary or ministry or C. WHH chapter questions due by midnight
Guat Trip HMP 18 Time to be announced: Missionary Forum/Q&A - SI Missionaries
6
Guat Trip HMP 19 Debriefing the Guatemalan experience, observations and lessons learned
4/20 or 21 Guatemala Mission Trip Participation evaluation due at end of debriefing
April 26 Missions Experience Journal due @ Midnight
Total Reading: 366 pages
7
