Spiritual Transformation 1 (ST101)
Fall 2025 Syllabus | LIFT 49
3 Credit Hours
SECTION 1: COURSE OVERVIEW
Course Instructors
Rachel Harlan, M.A.
rachelh@cotw.org
Office: (518) 548-4927 | Cell: (770) 714-7354
Caleb Harlan, M.A.
calebh@cotw.org
Office: (518) 548-4926 | Cell: (260) 740-3018
Course Description
A study and application of concepts and disciplines that foster spiritual growth and transformation
essential for being a disciple of Jesus Christ.
Spiritual growth cannot be measured by academic achievements. LIFT emphasizes experiential learning,
which is also difficult to quantify in traditional terms. Students are expected to take full advantage of
this opportunity for experiential, mentored learning by participating with enthusiasm in various
activities and disciplines. Because the core of the LIFT program is the practice of spiritual disciplines in
many forms, the primary class content of the Spiritual Transformation (ST) module is the study and
practice of spiritual disciplines.
Course themes will include:
• How to nurture desire to know God intimately
• The spiritual disciplines (prayer, fasting, solitude, meditation, study, forgiveness, etc.)
• Truths about believers’ identity in Christ and how these truths foster spiritual growth
• God’s grace through his gift of salvation and on a daily basis in life
• Biblical and theological study of the John 15 and Romans 8.
Course Expectations
Rachel and Caleb Harlan and Kate Trezise will teach the Spiritual Transformation (ST) classes. Students will follow
up on class topics as they meet in same-gender ST Discussion Groups AND individually with a LIFT staff member
throughout the semester for the purposes of accountability, encouragement, and prayer. LIFT can prepare the
environment, but students must choose their investment in the learning and growth processes.
Students should come to each class session prepared to benefit and contribute, having read the
assigned material and prepared to participate in discussion. Students should come to each session
(class, ST Discussion Group and individual mentoring) ready to benefit and contribute as part of a
community of God’s people, having thoughtfully read the assigned material and prepared to participate
in discussions. (See the class schedule.) Students will share, pray, and support each other in their
1
personal spiritual formation under the guidance of their mentors and the encouragement of their peers.
Because the LIFT schedule includes guest speakers and extensive travel, some weeks will entail intensive
study and class sessions. Other weeks students will continue independently reading and practicing the
spiritual disciplines.
Course Objectives
Students will:
A. Describe the importance of desire for God as necessary for relationship with Him and take steps to
increase that desire.
B. Know and practice the main types of spiritual disciplines that have been practiced throughout the
history of the Christian church and reflect on these practices.
C. Increase awareness of believers’ identity in Christ; apply these truths in order to nurture their
spiritual growth.
D. Understand the role of grace within the practice of Christian disciplines.
E. Recite John 15, Romans 8, and Psalm 103 from memory.
SECTION 2: COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Required and Supplemental Resources
Required Course Textbooks (provided by LIFT):
Required Texts
• Barton, Ruth Haley. Sacred Rhythms: Arranging Our Lives for Spiritual Transformation.
Downer’s Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press, 2006.
• Buchanan, Mark. Your God is Too Safe. Sisters: Multnomah, 2001. (Book provided.)
• Duvall, Scott, and Daniel Hays. Grasping God’s Word. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2012.
• Foster, Richard. Celebration of Discipline: The Path to Spiritual Growth. San Francisco: Harper,
1998.
• Moser, Phil. Just Like Jesus. Mullica Hill, NJ: Biblical Strategies, LLC, 2012.
• Yancey, Philip. What’s So Amazing About Grace. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1997.
• The Bible (NIV, TNIV, ESV, ASV, NAS, NKJ, RSV) – not provided by LIFT.
Required Excerpts (provided in ST binder):
• Anderson, Neil T. Victory Over the Darkness. Ventura, CA: Regal Books: 2000.
Chapter 2: “The Whole Gospel.” Ortberg, John. The Life You’ve Always Wanted. Grand
Rapids: Zondervan, 2002.
Chapter 5: “An Unhurried Life: The Practice of ‘Slowing.’”
Chapter 6: “Interrupting Heaven: The Practice of Prayer” (for credit students)
• Piper, John. A Hunger for God. Wheaton: Crossway Books, 1997.
Preface
Introduction: “A Homesickness for God”
Conclusion: “Why Does God Reward Fasting?”
• Voskamp, Ann. One Thousand Gifts. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2010.
Chapter 3: “First Flight.”
2
Course Schedule
Note: assignments in RED are required for those seeking academic credit, or it can be used for extra
credit (up to 1/2 value of the assignment). All other assignments are REQUIRED for ALL STUDENTS.
Please note: assignments are due at the beginning of the assigned class, so if a class date changes, the
reading will be due at the time of the new class start. For example, if a class is moved up from
Wednesday to Tuesday, the reading would be due at the beginning of the class on Tuesday.
Additionally, if you miss a class, contact the instructor prior to when your assignments are due. You are
expected to still complete the assignments on time and record them either in Moodle or via email by
the assigned due date. If you are absent on a Friday when a green sheet is due, you are expected to
submit your answers either in person before the due date or via email by the due date. Emails can be
sent to rachelh@cotw.org.
*These dates are subject to change due to the flexibility of the LIFT schedule.
Class* Topic Assignments Due Pts
(Readings are DUE by the Beginning of Class)
Weeks SUBMIT: weekly “Green Sheets” due Fri @ 9am 135
1-13
ST 1 Course Overview; READ: entire syllabus (before class)
8/25 Discipleship overview;
Desire
ST2 Discipleship & READ: Foster Ch 1 (pp.1-11); “Fan or Follower” 10, 5
8/29 Followship (excerpt in ST Binder)
ST3 Biblical Strategies READ: Moser “Just Like Jesus” (pp. 7-24) – AT TAP 5
9/4 emphasis: Prayer
ST4 Biblical Strategies READ: Moser “Just Like Jesus” (pp. 7-9, 25-39) 10
9/12 emphasis: Word
9/12 RECITE: Scripture Memory Checkpoint 1 (cards 1-4) 25
ST5 Sabbath – Kate Trezise WRITE: Advanced organizer “Sabbath” (Do 1st, tan 5, 5
9/19 sheet in ST binder)
READ: Barton Ch 8 “Sabbath” (Do 2nd)
ST6 Solitude, Silence READ: Foster ch 7; Buchanan ch 17 (for credit 10, 10
9/26 students)
ST7 - Fasting READ: Foster ch 4; 5, 10
Tioga and Piper’s A Hunger for God: “Preface,”
10/1 “Introduction,” and “Conclusion” (excerpt in ST
Binder) – AT TIOGA when due
ST8 Eucharisteo – Kate READ: Voskamp ch 3 (excerpt in ST Binder), 5, 5
10/7 Trezise and John 15
10/14 RECITE: Scripture Memory Checkpoint 2 (cards 1-9) 50
ST9 Grace READ: Yancey ch 2 & ch 4 (for credit students) 5, 10
10/17
ST10 Identity in Christ READ: Anderson Victory Over the Darkness ch 2, 10
10/24 “The Whole Gospel” (excerpt in ST Binder)
3
ST11 Conflict & READ: Peace Pursuit (excerpt in ST Binder) – In NH 5
10/31 Reconciliation: when due
“Fighting Well”
ST12 Biblical Strategies, READ: Moser “Just Like Jesus” (pp. 41-54) 5
11/7 emphasis: Holy Spirit
11/12 WRITE: Identity in Christ assignment due by 11:59 75
PM Monday night 11/11/24.
ST13 - Spiritual Retreat READ Foster Ch 1 (yes, again!); 10, 5
11/14 Calhoun: “Retreat” (pp. 77-79), “Meditation” (pp.
191-193), "Prayer of Recollection" (pp. 281-283)
Bring personal journals to class
11/21 WRITE: Semester Break Plan due @ Exit Talks 25
@ Bring personal journals to Exit Talks
Exit Talks
11/24 RECITE: Scripture Memory Checkpoint 3 (cards 1-12) 75
WRITE: Semester Break Reflection 50
Class Participation (x3) 120
Total: 670 pts
680 pts
Course Assignments
Overview
1. Class Participation
2. Completion of all readings prior to the assigned class times
3. Weekly practice of the spiritual disciplines as recorded on “green sheets”
4. Weekly/ Ongoing Memorization of:
• John 15 (ESV)
• Romans 8 (ESV)
5. Identity in Christ Assignment
6. Semester Break Assignment
Breakdown
1. Class Participation (Weeks 1-13, 19%)
In order to receive full participation credit for each class, students must contribute to class
discussions based on the assigned readings. Students might be called on to summarize the readings
during class. Students who do not engage with class teachings or discussions will lose participation
credit. Class participation grades will be collected three times throughout the semester.
2. Assigned readings for each class (Weeks 1-13; 15%)
Daily reading and writing assignments for class will be recorded on Moodle prior to the start of class.
Students should come to class prepared to contribute to discussions based on the daily assignments.
See course schedule for details. Students will indicate whether or not the daily assignment that was
due for that class has been completed. If the student fails to record points by the end of class, full
credit will not be given (see the section entitled “Late Assignments.”)
3. “Green Sheets” (Weeks 1-13, 23%)
Students are expected to practice weekly different spiritual disciplines. Accountability for these
practices will be self-recorded on each week’s “GREEN SHEET”. Points earned will be based on
4
completion. Each “green sheet” will be worth 9 or 12 points, recorded over the course of 13 weeks.
Disciplines recorded on weekly green sheets:
• ST Discussion Questions: ST Discussion Questions and application assignments will be given
for each class. At times these questions must be answered in written form; they will often
serve as discussion starters in subsequent ST Discussions.
• Disciplines of Choice: Students will choose from a spiritual discipline each week to practice;
the number will be determined by the scheduling of classes and will be further discussed in
class.
• Weekly Focus: Each week there will be a specific weekly focus assignment.
• Eucharisteo (starting week 8): add to your list at least 20 NEW remembrances (that you
haven’t recorded previously this semester).
4. Scripture Memory (3 checkpoints, 23%)
Scripture is necessary and integral to the practice and theory of all spiritual disciplines. Our chief
spiritual discipline focus is Scripture memorization. Each student will orally quote a trio of biblical
passages (John 15 ESV, Romans 8 ESV, and PS 130 ESV). The verses have been divided up throughout
the semester, with approximately 7 verses being required each week. Each student will be provided
with a laminated set of cards containing each week’s verses. This is not an easy assignment! Please
expect to memorize 1-2 verses a day. This is not the type of assignment most of you can put off and
then cram at the deadline. We will recite this passage together and individually regularly throughout
the semester—at various meals, on hikes, in lounges, in airports, and wherever else it seems
worthwhile!
5. Identity in Christ Paper (10%)
Each student will write a paper based on the topic of “Identity in Christ.” Details about this
assignment will be discussed in class.
6. Semester Break Assignment (10%)
Each student will write a spiritual formation plan for the semester break (25pts). A written reflection
will be submitted by Dec 29th (50pts). Details about this assignment will be discussed in class.
Method of Evaluating Student Performance
Assignments Points Weight
Green Sheets 135 20%
Written Assignments 155 23%
Scripture Memory Checkpoints 150 23%
Assigned Readings 110 16%
Class Participation Checkpoints 120 18%
TOTAL 670 100%
SECTION 3: COURSE POLICIES
Late Assignments
Get your work in on time! Late work will be accepted without penalty only if prior arrangements have
been made with the instructor due to circumstances beyond the student’s control. Assignments done
late are still encouraged to complete the valuable work and learn from the assignment, however,
anything late within the first three days of when it was due will be deducted 10% of its value per day it is
late up until 3 days.
5
No late assignments will be graded after three days of when it was due. LATE WORK GREATLY REDUCES
YOUR GRADE – JUST DO IT – ON TIME. You are responsible for getting your work uploaded to our
assignment software, Moodle. The instructor will not seek you out for your assigned work. If you have
difficult circumstances preventing you from turning the work in on time, contact the instructor prior to
when it is due. Late credits will NOT be allowed past the indicated due dates for the practice of the
spiritual disciplines, the recitation of the scripture to individual mentors, or any extra credit
assignment.
Electronic submission of assignments
All assignments uploaded to Moodle must be uploaded as PDFs. The time that you submit them is the
time of submission for the calculation of late work. All electronic assignments should be submitted via
Moodle when possible.
LIFT Academic Policy
• Each student’s performance will be reviewed twice during each semester. If he/she is failing any
class (61% or below) he/she will be dismissed from the program.
• Students must have at least a D- (62% or higher) in all four classes to graduate from or complete
the fall semester.
• To qualify to stay in the program (to attend the second semester and participate in the summer
internship), students must achieve a C- (72% or higher) or higher in all classes. The same applies
for being eligible to attend the LIFT banquet at the end of the spring semester.
• Academic honors will be awarded per semester to any student who achieves an A- or an A in all
classes.
• If you have less than C- (71% or below) in any class as of noon on a Monday you will be required
to attend the group study session and not participate in that weekly excursion in order to have
additional time to complete academic work.
• A half day of operations support (i.e. housekeeping) will be required when not participating in
an excursion, either for academic or physical reasons.
Plagiarism
• A student who confesses to dishonesty in a course already completed will be given a semester
grade of no higher than a “C” (75%) in the course in which it took place. If it happens in a course
still in progress he/she must make up, within two weeks of the date of the confession, the
particular academic work in question and will receive a grade not higher than “D” for the made-
up requirements. The alternative is to receive a grade of “F” (numerical grade of 0).
• A student detected in committing academic dishonesty will receive a grade of “F” (numerical
grade of 0) for the part of the course (academic work) in question and a grade not higher than
“D” for the course. A student who has unintentionally misused sources (determined through
consultation with faculty) will be permitted to resubmit the work with a reduction of one full
letter grade for the assignment. A report will be filed and subsequent misuse of sources will be
classified as plagiarism and subject to the consequences articulated above.
Letter/Numerical Grade Scale
A 95-100 B+ 89-91 C+ 79-81 D+ 69-71 F 0-61
A- 92-94 B 85-88 C 75-78 D 65-68
B- 82-84 C- 72-74 D- 62-64
6
SECTION 4: Bibliography
Bennis, Warren and Burt Nanus. Leader. New York: Harper Collins, 2007.
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich. The Cost of Discipleship. New York: Touchstone
Publishing, 1995.
Carson, D. A., The Gospel According to John, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1990.
Comer, John Mark, The Ruthless Elimination of Hurry,¸WaterBrook, 2019.
Duvall, J.S., & Hays, J.D. Grasping God’s Word. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2012. (3rd Edition)
MacArthur, John. The Book on Leadership. New York: Nelson Books, 2004.
Malphurs, Aubrey. Being Leaders. Grand Rapids: Baker Books, 2003.
Hybels, Bill. Courageous Leadership. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2002.
Longman, III, Tremper. Psalms: An Introduction and Commentary, InterVarsity Press, 2014.
Maxwell, John. The 21 Irrefutable Laws of Leadership. Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers, 1998.
McIntosh, Gary L. and Samuel D. Rima, Sr. Overcoming the Dark Side of Leadership. Grand Rapids, Baker
Books, 1997.
McQuilkin, J. Robertson. Limits of Cultural Interpretation. Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society, 23/2
(June 1980), 113 124.
Roxburgh, Alan J. and Fred Romanuk. The Missional Leader. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Press, 2006.
Stanley, Andy and Reggie Joiner and Lane Jones. 7 Practices of Effective Ministry. Oregon, Multnomah
Publishers INC, 2004.
Stott, John., The Message of Romans, InterVarsity Press, 2020.
Sweet, Leonard. Summoned to Lead. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2004.
Thielman, Frank. The NIV Application Commentary. Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1995.
Traina, Robert A. Methodical Bible Study. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1980.
Willard, Dallas, The Spirit of the Disciplines, Harper Collins, 1988.
7